{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\widctlpar\f0\fs22 PONE-D-24-11318\par
Prochlorococcus marinus\~responses to light and oxygen\par
PLOS ONE\line\line Dear Dr. Savoie,\line\line Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE\rquote s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.\line\line Please submit your revised manuscript by Jun 21 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at\~{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:plosone@plos.org" }}{\fldrslt{\ul\cf1\cf1\ul plosone@plos.org}}}}\f0\fs22 . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ }}{\fldrslt{https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22  and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.\line\line Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:\par

\pard{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf2\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\sb100\sa100 A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.\par
{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.\par
{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.\par

\pard\widctlpar If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.\line\line If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols }}{\fldrslt{https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22 . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols }}{\fldrslt{https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22 .\line\line We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.\par

\pard\widctlpar\sb100\sa100 Kind regards,\par
Jos\'e9 A. Fern\'e1ndez Robledo, Ph.D.\line Academic Editor\line PLOS ONE\par

\pard\widctlpar Journal Requirements:\par

\pard\widctlpar\sb100\sa100 When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.\par
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at\~\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22  and\~\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\par
2. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code }}{\fldrslt{https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22  and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse.\par
3. Thank you for uploading your study's underlying data set. Unfortunately, the repository you have noted in your Data Availability statement does not qualify as an acceptable data repository according to PLOS's standards.\par
At this time, please upload the minimal data set necessary to replicate your study's findings to a stable, public repository (such as figshare or Dryad) and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers that may be used to access these data. For a list of recommended repositories and additional information on PLOS standards for data deposition, please see {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories }}{\fldrslt{https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22 .\par
4. We note that you have referenced (Campbell, unpub) on page 17, which has currently not yet been accepted for publication. Please remove this from your References and amend this to state in the body of your manuscript: (ie \ldblquote Bewick et al. [Unpublished]\rdblquote ) as detailed online in our guide for authors\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-reference-style }}{\fldrslt{http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-reference-style\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\~\par
5. We notice that your supplementary [Supplemental Figures 1-5 and S1 Table] are included in the manuscript file. Please remove them and upload them with the file type 'Supporting Information'. Please ensure that each Supporting Information file has a legend listed in the manuscript after the references list.\par
6. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article\rquote s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.\par

\pard\widctlpar\line\line [Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]\line\line Reviewers' comments:\line\line Reviewer's Responses to Questions\par

\pard\widctlpar\sb100\sa100\cf2\b Comments to the Author\b0\line\line 1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?\line\line The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. \cf0\par
Reviewer #1:\~Yes\par
Reviewer #2:\~Partly\par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard\widctlpar\sb100\sa100\cf2 2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? \cf0\par
Reviewer #1:\~N/A\par
Reviewer #2:\~Yes\par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard\widctlpar\sb100\sa100\cf2 3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?\line\line The {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.plosone.org/static/policies.action#sharing"}}{\fldrslt{\ul\cf1\cf1\ul PLOS Data policy}}}}\f0\fs22  requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data\emdash e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party\emdash those must be specified.\cf0\par
Reviewer #1:\~Yes\par
Reviewer #2:\~Yes\par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard\widctlpar\sb100\sa100\cf2 4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?\line\line PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.\cf0\par
Reviewer #1:\~Yes\par
Reviewer #2:\~Yes\par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard\widctlpar\sb100\sa100\cf2 5. Review Comments to the Author\line\line Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)\cf0\par
Reviewer #1:\~This manuscript presents a helpful expansion of our knowledge of the ecological tolerance ranges of several Prochlorococcus ecotypes. It is especially interesting in its implications for range expansion of this genus under potential future conditions, although this angle could be expanded on in my opinion, as I explain below.\line\line Specific Comments:\line\line The abstract seems to omit any discussion of the conclusions/bigger picture of the study.\line\line Line 55: LLII/III and LLIV are not the \ldblquote oldest\rdblquote  clades, but the most basal or early branching.\line\line Line 369: The authors invoke \ldblquote limitations in the annotation process\rdblquote  to explain the lack of evidence for MED4 ATP synthase. What does this mean? The MED4 genome surely contains ATP synthase genes.\line\line Paragraph starting L363: Why is there no discussion of the Rubisco data? Or especially the absence thereof at low O2 for ecotypes HL1 and LL1? Since Rubisco is one of the most abundant proteins in a photosynthesizing cell, does this indicate that these ecotypes are present but not actively fixing carbon under these conditions? Also, is it worth noting that LLIV is the only variety to be detected at all in the deepest low O2 site -- which would appear to be consistent with subsequent findings in this study?\line\line Figures 3 through 8: These figures are obviously the crux of the results in this paper, but as they are currently presented it is relatively difficult to think clearly about them. I feel like they could be combined into 2 or 3 full page figures which might make it easier to make the relevant comparisons; either by combining the two types of figure (growth rates and model fits) for each ecotype, or else all the growth rate curves together in one figure and all the model plots together in another.\line\line I'm also not sure I understand why the red light data is relevant -- perhaps by moving it to supplemental, it would be easier to compile these data into compound figures?\line\line I also wonder if the data from the model fits could be used to predict which of the three ecotypes would prevail (have the highest growth rate) across the parameter space depicted, resulting in another figure showing something like "zones of exclusion" for each ecotype, which would be interesting in terms of predictive power. One could easily imagine applying those "zones of exclusion" to a map of the actual ocean at various depths, or even comparing current with projected future conditions of spreading OMZs. This is merely a suggestion -- I don't expect the authors to necessarily do this, but I think if they chose to it would make the manuscript of broader interest.\line\line L482, 536, 548: some experiments were not performed \ldblquote due to time constraints\rdblquote . I'm not sure I understand this, although I am interpreting it along the lines of "the person doing the experiments graduated"\'85 In any case, it seems like these particularly treatments were unlikely to grow, so it's not important that they were omitted -- but maybe there is a better way to phrase this that doesn\rquote t sound so fishy?\line\line Figure S4 \emdash  It is very hard to see the fit lines other than the pooled fit. Consider using different colors and solid lines since this is online.\line\line Table 1: The trees described in the legend should be included in the supplemental material.\line\line Fig 11: Despite the fact that it is explained in the legend, the figure should probably indicate that O2 values are log Km, or else put actual values on the log-scale Y axis. Also, the axis should indicate the units for Km. Finally, why is the red band so narrow compared to the green and blue?\line\line L757: The authors should specify that this is a DNA repair ligase, not the DNA ligase that seals Okazaki fragments during DNA replication (assuming this is the case).\line\line L 758: Photolyase should not have been relevant in the lab experiments because there is no UV light emitted (AFAIK) by the bulbs used in the Multicultivator. Also, it is unlikely that the absence of these two genes is sufficient to explain why these strains can\rquote t grow at the ocean\rquote s surface.\line\line Fig 12: Phosphoglycolate phosphatase is a major enzyme in the photorespiration pathway \emdash  what does it have to do with DNA repair? There is evidence that 2-phosphoglycolate causes oxidative stress, but I don\rquote t think this enzyme is properly a DNA repair enzyme.\line\line Summary and Conclusion: I feel like the authors really need to expand their discussion of how these findings apply to the future ocean. Where are OMZs likely to expand? Are there specific examples of regions where LLIV might expand to the surface? What would it mean for LLIV to become competitive against HLI and HLII? I think this is likely to be similar to scenarios where Synechococcus may outcompete Prochlorococcus, since LLIV is quite similar to Syn in terms of size and genome repertoire. I'm not sure where exactly such a discussion should end up, but I think it is important that the authors try to "seal the deal" a bit better in this concluding section and relate the findings back to the issues laid out in the introduction.\par
Reviewer #2:\~Savoie et al describe a beautiful and extensive set of detailed Prochlorococcus growth rate measurements for three strains, representing distinct ecotypes, under varied conditions of light and oxygen concentration. The work adds a lot of interesting and useful information concerning the impact of varied photoperiods, wavelengths/PUR, and oxygen concentrations to the literature. These data are also connected to hypotheses about the potential role of DNA repair and PSII maintenance to explain the results. The methods are appropriately detailed, and the experiments appear to have been done with great care. The data are available in a usable form.\line\line My primary concern with the manuscript comes from the way the results are framed throughout. The authors describe results as informing about the growth of Prochlorococcus across a matrix of different conditions. However, my interpretation of the methods is that the authors took from a maintenance culture kept under standard growth conditions and then immediately transferred them into the Multicultivator to look at responses. This is of course completely valid, but extensive experience by many in the field (e.g. described in Moore et al 2007 Limn. Oceanog. Methods and elsewhere) is that these cells typically require multiple generations to acclimate to new growth conditions. I read these data as more reflecting the immediate response of Prochlorococcus to environmental changes. It is quite conceivable that some of these strains may exhibit a different growth rate than what you report if allowed to gradually acclimate to their new condition rather than directly move them. I would suggest that the framing and interpretation of the paper should reflect this. I also have no idea whether this might have influenced the surprising observations of MIT9313 growth at relatively high PAR. Global change scenarios would presumably give cells many generations to physiologically acclimate to differences (as well as to evolutionarily adapt).\line\line This reviewer found the manuscript to be quite difficult to read as I kept wanting to understand how different strains were responding to similar types of variables, which made me have to constantly flip through and reread parts of the manuscript to find the information. Establishing a clearer overall summary narrative early on, as opposed to presenting a laundry list of data, might help. For instance, more clearly motivating the questions driving the analyses in each section would help; many paragraphs simply start with \ldblquote Figure X shows\'85\rdblquote . But, the organization of the paper is of course up to the authors.\line\line Minor points:\line\line General note: the manuscript text at some points refers broadly to \ldblquote growth\rdblquote , and other places is more specific about drawing conclusions about \ldblquote growth rate\rdblquote . I would suggest being clearer in some way that you are focused on growth rate and not growth yield.\line\line 40: Despite _its_ small cell size (?)\line\line 56: \ldblquote Affinity\rdblquote  for low light? Consider rephrasing\line\line 84: Follett et al 2022 PNAS showed that temp is not the only factor influencing poleward issues - ecological interactions may further impact poleward shift during warming\line\line 199: Could you please state more about why you are confident in this assignment? What validation or metric leads you to this?\line\line 209: It seems overly general to blame the culturing difficulties solely on having reduced genomes \endash  in this context, it is the lack of just one gene (catalase) that matters, and reduced genomes reflect an outcome of the ultimate suite of selective pressures acting on these systems.\line\line 363: Could the authors comment somewhere on why you took this proteomic approach to examine the baseline distribution of Pro across O2 and depth, as opposed to (or at least in concert with) the extensive metagenomic, amplicon, qPCR, etc datasets of ecotype abundances available?\line\line 407: growth -> grew?\line\line 428: How many replicates were carried out for most experiments? Perhaps I just missed it, but please be sure this information is clear in the methods\line\line 431, and generally throughout the paper: Would the authors care to comment on any connection between the differences in blue vs red light growth and the underlying amount of energy input from these different wavelengths?\line\line Fig 4 and related figures: It might be useful to plot the specific measured points within the countour plot\line\line 685: The lack of detected FtsH could simply be a factor of low overall spectral counts and detection limits in the dataset; please provide more context to help the reader understand whether this could be just a small number problem with respect to MIT9313 in low O2 samples; Fig. 10 seems to just show a binary detected/not detected value.\par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard\widctlpar\sb100\sa100\cf2 6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article ({{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/editorial-and-peer-review-process#loc-peer-review-history"}}{\fldrslt{\ul\cf1\cf1\ul what does this mean?}}}}\f0\fs22 ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.\line\line\line If you choose \ldblquote no\rdblquote , your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.\line\line\line\b Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review?\b0  For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.plos.org/privacy-policy"}}{\fldrslt{\ul\cf1\cf1\ul Privacy Policy}}}}\f0\fs22 .\cf0\par
Reviewer #1:\~No\par
Reviewer #2:\~No\par

\pard\widctlpar\par
\line\line [NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]\line\line While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool,\~{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ }}{\fldrslt{https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22 . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at\~{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:figures@plos.org" }}{\fldrslt{\ul\cf1\cf1\ul figures@plos.org}}}}\f0\fs22 . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.\par

\pard\widctlpar\sa240\par

\pard\widctlpar\par
\i\fs20 In compliance with data protection regulations, you may request that we remove your personal registration details at any time. {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/login.asp?a=r" }}{\fldrslt{\ul\cf1\cf1\ul (Remove my information/details)}}}}\f0\fs20 . Please contact the publication office if you have any questions.\i0\fs22\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f1\lang9\par
}
 